Your Social World

Why Your Social Life Is Important

Unless you and your partner live in a remote region, depending on only yourselves and your dogsled team, you are likely to be interacting with other people regularly.
Of course there is a huge range in how much you interact, with whom you interact, and for what purpose.
Your involvement with others will be a large part of your life as a couple.
Many people know that living near parents or in-laws, staying in the community they grew up in, or having a large group of friends and extended family, will affect their relationship.
And certainly other social commitments that arise from business or other networks may have an impact on the couple's relationship.
Who you are with will definitely affect how your social networks expand or contract, and for some people, this becomes more than they bargained for.
People who prize privacy may interact for a while with someone who has an intense social calendar, but when they come to realize what this means for their own life, they may abandon the relationship altogether.
Often, however, people don't realize how intertwined their social lives will be until they are well into a relationship.
For many, this becomes an unexpected area of growth and satisfaction.
For others, it is an unwelcome responsibility that dilutes the pleasure of the relationship.
The following quiz gives you chance to look at the complex social world couples can create with one another so that you can decide which version of social interaction, and what balance of privacy versus sociability, you want in your life.

Many of the issues raised in this section are related to those personality characteristics reviewed in chapter 11, "Self-Nurturing," which discusses introversion and extroversion, and which play a significant part in shaping your social life.

Please mark the following statements True or False.

T F 1.
I love and look forward to big family gatherings and vacations.

T F 2.
I have many close friends and intend to give them serious time even if I am married or in a committed relationship.

T F 3.
I love having friends over for dinner parties, casual gatherings, or just to talk.
I also like having out-of-town friends visit and stay with us.

T F 4.
I want to help close relatives when they are distressed.
I would feel duty-bound to do something for them if they were in economic or emotional trouble.

T F 5.
I like it when people just drop over.

T F 6.
I count time with friends and my partner as couple time.
I don't feel that I need to be alone with my partner a great deal of the time to feel connected.

T F 7.
I need close friends.
I need to confide in them and I would want my partner to understand that some of those confidences would be about our relationship.

Scoring

Give yourself one point for every True answer.

0-2: You are moderately social and could probably accommodate someone who is more private than you.

3-5: You are quite social and you would have to be sensitive to a private person's needs, which would probably include modifying your social life.

6-7: You are an extremely social person.
It would be very hard for you to be with someone who wanted you mostly for him or herself.
There would have to be many compromises.

1.
I love and look forward to big family gatherings and vacations.

Some people who grew up in a big family loved it, while others felt oppressed by always having that many people around.
There is no telling how family size or family ties will affect someone but the fact is that some people cleave to their family.
Others try to separate by moving away or limiting family time and see family outings as a duty, not a pleasure.
While this attitude may apply only to their own family, it could also apply to their in-laws as well.
The idea of meeting Uncle Morty at the hotel bar and hearing another story about your childhood is a dreaded scenario.
.
.
.

But sometimes people are extremely attached to their families.
They like to take vacations with their parents or brothers and sisters, Family gatherings can become huge affairs.
Yet even on a day-to-day basis, some people just like to stay connected-in person, by phone, or e-mail.
They love to gossip, deal with every little crisis, or simply pass the time of day together.
Spouses or significant others are usually expected to get with the program and at least pretend to be happy to be involved.
Ideally, if you both like the family connection, each partner will appreciate the other's participation and pleasure in the people they love.
Even here, however, there are pitfalls since families tend to be territorial and there are the inevitable issues about where to spend the holidays or what to do when two important family events coincide.

At the beginning of your relationship, it may not occur to you to discuss how you would deal with your own or your partner's family.
But how you handle familial obligations can become an increasingly important aspect of your dynamic as a couple.

2.
I have many close friends and intend to give them serious time even if I am married or in a committed relationship.

Friendship is a mainstay of many people's lives, but what percentage of time and emotional space it should take once people get in a serious relationship is negotiable.
Some partners believe that once you are with them, all other relationships should be minimal and only attended to in time that could not be filled with each other.
They have expectations, sometimes gleaned from their parents' lives or from the movies and books they have read, about how much they are willing to give up time with a spouse.
Alternatively, others need time with friends, family, or many others outside the relationship, or they will feel isolated and lonely.
This makes some partners feel less special, and lower on the priority list in their spouse's life.
Yet, the opposite response could arise since some people seek lots of personal quiet time and welcome the opportunities to be alone when their partner is engaged with other people.

You may get an inkling of your partner's preferences when you are dating, but once a commitment is made, the reluctance of one partner to give up friendships or outside commitments for the other may become more intense.

But possessiveness over a partner's time is more than just a response to a practical issue like filling up one's time or resentment at being left with all the chores.
It can also be a jealous response: Many people want to be everything to their partner: friend, lover, confidant, and sole support for their physical and emotional needs.
Or they want to be taken care of and they don't like having other people take their partner's attention.

They see their partner as a scarce resource and they simply don't want to share.
They may also be somewhat worried that certain friends will lead their partner down a path that is dangerous to the relationship or shared values.
Quite often they are worried that the privacy of the relationship will be invaded.

How you see friendship, how deeply one invests time in platonic relationships, how private or shared friends should be, what kind of time as well as how much time is reasonably invested in them, and whether or not time in a group counts as time together for both of you, really affects how happy people are in a relationship.
While the specific philosophy of how you value and organize time inside and outside your relationships doesn't matter, what does matter is that you share the same notions of how to apportion time with each other, with family and friends, and other social obligations.

3.
I love having friends over for dinner parties, casual gatherings, or just to talk.
I also like having out-of-town friends visit and stay with us.

One great way to pay homage to friendship is to have friends into your home.
Provided your partner likes your friends, is willing to help with the work (or you really don't mind that they don't help), and doesn't feel that their privacy is compromised, things will work out fine.

People who are very private (those extreme Introverts from chapter 11) do not throw dinner parties, or have them only once in a blue moon.
They prefer to meet people outside their homes.
The idea of weekend guests fills them with dread.
It does not energize them to have friends over-especially large groups or new people-or, in fact, anyone who will upset their daily routine or disturb their peace and privacy.

If you are a very social creature, you like putting out the effort because people energize you.
But this is not true for everyone, and what you see as a delightful and celebratory event could be seen by your partner as a painful.
intrusion of valuable couple time.
Where, when, and how often you socialize could be a great bond in a relationship-or it could be divisive.

4.
I want to help close relatives when they are distressed.
I would feel duty-bound to do something for them if they were in economic or emotional trouble.

If you answered True to this question, you are tightly connected to your family and you feel a sense of ongoing responsibility.
This is admirable, but may not be shared by all partners.
Many people have broken their ties to some either because they feel it is natural once a person becomes an adult to concentrate mainly on their own household, or because they have ambivalent or angry feelings toward their own family.
Sometimes these two feelings fuse-the anger or disappointment a person experiences about their own family background helps support a general philosophy that everyone is on their own as an adult.
They don't feel this obligation to their own family and are probably not crazy about the idea that you would support yours.

This can be a big issue especially if time and resources are tight.
If here is a significant sacrifice involved, the struggle between two people who don't share the same vision can devolve into the question, "Who do you love most?" Furthermore, if your spouse feels that your family and friends are constantly needy, they may also feel that the needs of the relationship have become secondary to your other emotional commitments.
Relationships have broken up on this very issue, and finding a mutually acceptable policy about the needs of family members is important.
Family loyalty is a powerful emotion and any impediment to being a good son or laughter-or even a friend-is a challenge to a person's estimation of their own integrity, honor, and goodness.
Figuring out how to set priorities and limits in the relationship and still satisfy your own or a partner's sense of their responsibilities can be tricky if your values about duty and love are very different.

5.
I like it when people just drop over.
This statement taps into how permeable you want your life to be.
If you are a people person you welcome the surprise guest -you are almost always happy to see friends.
You want people to feel that they can drop in anytime and will always be welcomed.

However, for more introverted people, an open house is a nightmare.
The last thing you would want is to have people interrupt the peace and privacy of your home, unless you have expressly invited them.
You want to feel that you have created an island of intimacy and that you can control the way you experience your environment.
If you were with someone socially open to the world, you would have to have an explicit discussion about your physical and emotional boundaries early on in the relationship.
People who are very social rarely understand the cost of unexpected visitors or household guests to someone who is private.
Moderation would be essential but depending on the gap between the two partners, there might have to be considerable revision of one, or the other's, tolerance level for company.

6.
I count time with friends and my partner as couple time.
I don't feel that I need to be alone with my partner a great deal of the time to feel connected.

A very social person can get most of what they need from their partner during larger social occasions.
They feel together as a couple when going out to a movie in a foursome, being at a dinner party together, or just watching television with their children.
They don't necessarily distinguish friend time, family time, and couple time.
Of course, they want some alone time, but they will rarely feel deprived of their partner if they have had a week in which they saw each other a lot but only occasionally without other people around.

This group interaction would not satisfy someone who is very private or couple-oriented.
They could be with their partner every day and night, but if there isn't one-on-one time, it doesn't count.
A more social person may not realize that all you really want to do is be alone with them, and that you are not counting all of this social interaction as couple time.

This situation can become really upsetting for a private person if it goes on and on and especially if it is exacerbated by heavy work schedules.
Then, partner time for intimacy is extremely curtailed with one or both partners starting to feel neglected and unimportant.
If you are someone who gets absorbed in your work, your colleagues, and friends, you have to be careful that you really have given enough to your relationship.

7.
I need close friends.
I need to confide in them and I would want my partner to understand that some of those confidences would be about our relationship.

While many of the statements in this arena of couple relations may be more applicable to one gender or the other, this one is likely to be extremely different for men and women.
Women tend to have more friendships built on the exchange of confidences in which intimacy is measured by how much is being shared.
Withholding information about one's relationship or other important issues is considered proof of the limits of the friendship.
The deeper the friendship, the more likely nothing is held back.

Men are less likely to do this, although some men have a best friend who can listen and will protect these secrets.
More often than not, a man's confidant is a woman-and often their spouse-since men learn early in life that other men are their competitors and that to expose their vulnerabilities is dangerous, This explains why most men consider the intimate conversations they have with their partner to be very special, probably unique, and definitely not appropriate to be shared with anyone else.

This puts women in an untenable situation.
In order to keep female friendship profound, they must exchange secrets and talk about their relationships.
But to be true to their partner's wishes, they should keep most things (perhaps all things about them) private.
Caught in this dilemma, most women solve the issue by lying or omitting what they are sharing with their family and close friends.

But this is not exclusively a woman's issue.
Many couples have differences of opinion about how much information is private and how much is shared.
If a woman knew that her partner was sharing details about their private life with another woman or another man, she probably wouldn't be too happy about that-even if she was doing the same thing! It is not clear what is fair to talk about and what is disloyal and potentially harmful to a partner, but whatever the finer points, some partners would consider anything, even their shoe size, to be no one else's business.
Setting up boundaries of mutual protection, and then observing them, is the safest and most loving way to proceed.
This is especially true in the beginning of a relationship, when commitment is fragile.
When someone feels unsafe and vulnerable they may be inclined to bolt in favor of a safer harbor.
While privacy may be the best option in any relationship, sometimes one needs to seek advice and perspective from a friend to help solve problems or determine the course of a relationship.
Finding the balance between getting advice and maintaining your partner's privacy and dignity may be harder than you might think but it is essential in the long term.
