Money is not the most romantic topic we could talk about -- but it could have the most impact on the choice of partner you make. Money (either earned or inherited) determines where you live, what you buy, how you spend your leisure time, your network of friends and acquaintances, even the way you view yourself and others. Unfortunately, it is one of the least discussed premarital issues. Even if it is talked about, couples tend to skip over some of the harder issues: how much money do they feel they need to be happy; how would they spend money on luxuries versus necessities; how much money is appropriate to save; and to what extent are they responsible for each other's debts and charitable commitments.
Some serious couples will discuss their entire sexual history with one another -- even being graphic about it during counseling, and work to change things for the better if the situation warrants it. But these same couples who can be so frank and open with each other concerning one sub-eat will react quite differently when asked about how much money they Lave in the bank. A couple's financial situation is more often than not Themed as the most intimate aspect of their relationship, and they hardly discuss with each other, much less an outsider.
Money creates and expresses status, freedom, prestige, and control. Some people try to resist its seductions, while others embrace them without guilt or ambivalence. While it is unseemly and perhaps offensive in most modern Western societies to admit that you are marrying for money, many societies across the globe base marriage on exactly that premise.
While we seldom hesitate to use jobs and education as measures of present and future success and prestige, we rarely have the guts to declare how important money can be when it comes to love matches. You need to know what your economic agenda will be inside a relationship, and what you can and cannot do without. Again, there are no right answers to the questions that follow, but your answers will provide a good diagnostic about your financial habits and values and help you to determine the ideal economic profile of a future mate. which you and a partner should agree.
Money and Economic Aspirations and Evaluation: How will you mix love and money?
The answers to each of these questions reveal important aspects about money acquisition and management, which affect relationship satisfaction and stability.
1. I could not love a person who doesn't make enough money to help me live the lifestyle I need in order to be happy.
How you answered this question reveals your expectations of your partner's ability to earn enough money for the lifestyle you want. If you answered True to this question, it means that you will be extremely disappointed if you have to become the major wage earner or your partner does not reach the economic level of success that you expect. Alternatively you may have answered False because you are sure that you are the one who will be economically successful, and you believe in yourself and don't need any help. But if you are depending on someone else to help achieve the lifestyle you want, you better make sure that you are looking at people whose economic success is relatively predictable. This leaves out many entrepreneurs where although the possibility for success may be high, the probability of failure is not to be discounted. And you might be cautious about those in highly competitive fields in which few people reach a high level of compensation such as artists, actors, architects, teachers, and professional musicians. Of course, many people have surprising successes and failures there are no completely accurate predictions: Even highly trained professional people can lose their jobs, get depressed, or change ambitions over the life cycle. Success is relative, so you will be judging someone's financial potential on your terms. If your happiness is really dependent on economic success, you have to make as safe a choice as you can in order to keep your love alive. This statement may sound calculating, but it's actually the most thoughtful course you can take. Not everybody cares a lot about money and many people can be perfectly happy no matter what their economic situation. But if you want and need the sense of fulfillment and security that only money can bring, you will have to consider your partner's economic solidity so that you never want to have to leave an otherwise viable relationship because of "insufficient funds."
Be realistic. If you care about money, make it key to your emotional and marital decision-making. Don't kid yourself. You might have been tempted to answer the questions in this chapter to create the impression that money doesn't matter to you. Okay. You will get points for being politically correct but if your partner is an economic disaster, you won't be happy and your relationship will suffer.
If, on the other hand, having or earning a lot of money really and truly is not an important issue to you, and your respect and love for your partner will not be affected by economic instability or failure, picking a partner suddenly becomes a lot easier: just make sure that the person you are pick has the same values you have, or you are capable and willing to beck. person who meets their economic expectations.
2. All other things being equal, I tend to respect people who make a lot of money more than people who have modest incomes.
Respect is one of the key elements for long-term love and if you tend to give people who are economically successful more latitude then you obviously need to be with someone who fits that profile. If you believe that a high income is a clear indicator that a person is special -- able to survive in a cutthroat business environment, obviously bright, savvy, or hard work-ing, talented to get so far in life, etc.- you really should be with someone whose economic success lives up to your standards and expectations. Many women- and some men--will accommodate many personality quirks and differences if their partner is economically powerful; not just because of the money, but because of the strong personality that often goes with it. If respect and income go together for you, admit it and act accordingly in your choice of partner.
On the other hand, if money has little or nothing to do with your respect or admiration for a partner, and your partner feels the same way, then the need to pick someone who is economically secure becomes less critical.
You do, of course, have to make sure this feeling is mutual, or again, be in a secure economic position so that their feelings for you will never have to be tested. Many partners have had a rude awakening about the nature of their relationship when the couple had to face unexpected economic hardships.
Even if those times were eventually weathered, the fact that one's spouse didn't believe in them, or that they were cold and fretful and couldn't be emotionally supportive during the challenging period, could have some long term fallout that affects one or both members of the couples' commitment.
It is hard to forget that when money did become an issue, your partner voiced disappointment or lose of confidence in vou as a person.
3. I have often spent more money than I really can afford.
If money just burns a hole in your pocket, it's going to be hard for you to live within severe economic limitations. (Granted, one can overspend no matter how much money is coming in but if you are dangerously over. spending, you will need to control it, or it could destroy any relationship.)
Even if your overspending is not of catastrophic proportions, you need to be able to earn enough yourself to cover this habit or be with a partner who can offer some shelter and repair.
If you answered False to this question, you probably watch your dol. lars carefully and can be disciplined about how much you spend and save.
You most likely want someone who is as cautious (and as good a planner) as you are. If you have other characteristics that show control, such as being a Risk Avoider and being Cautious, you have a fairly consistent profile: You are conservative in many areas of your life and your partner's approach to monetary matters should be reasonably similar to your own.
4. I have, or want to have, the "best of the best" on some high-ticket items such as cars, a house, and vacations.
If you answered True to this question, you are going to need some big time money to indulge your tastes. Some people look for good value; others like you, want the best -- the most beautiful or most prestigious items.
In general, those are very expensive. If you can provide such preferences for you and a partner, and feel good about being able to do so, no problem, But if you cannot do it for yourself, or you can do part of it but will need a partner's contribution to help make it possible, you need to take that into
consideration.On the other hand, if you find that the insatiable desire for living the high lie to be a preoccupation of the shallow minded, you might want to And someone else who shares your disdain for labels, five-star hotels, and "name" restaurants -- even if you can afford them.
5. I need economic stability in my life. I don't overspend and I would be extremely upset if I was with someone who overspends or doesn't have a plan to save money.
Money isn't just important for people who live the "high life"; it is also important for people who are very worried about economic stability. If you answered yes to this question, you may not need someone wealthy, but you do not want much volatility in your economic world. You would be very worried about having a partner who spends money they did not have, who has suffered economic ups and downs in the past, or who carried large debts or made risky investments that could have a negative impact on your basic lifestyle. In this case it is not the level of money that is important to you. Rather, it is the style of spending, investing, and maintaining money about which you need to be aware. If you risk finding yourself in an unstable economic situation, you might want to look for someone who can help make your financial life more predictable. If you answered false to this question, however, you probably have more of an entrepreneurial or adventurous spirit that allows you to deal well with the ups and downs of financial fortune. You don't worry about getting in trouble over money; it may have happened, and you lived through it! You might need a partner who is willing to live on the economic edge; and who can absorb economic uncertainty without it affecting their feelings about the relationship.
6. I would very much prefer to be with someone who makes more money than I do.
Economic success is always relative. No matter how much money you make, if you feel that your respect and satisfaction will be substantially increased by being with someone more economically successful than you are, then you need to look for someone who not only makes more money Chan you currently do, but is almost guaranteed to do so in the future, still economic success is notoriously unpredictable. If you were to become the
senior earner, then you need to be quite sure that you are picking someone with a very good chance of staying as successful.
to caveat here: Since economic success is relative, there is always the chance that the person you meet will continue to earn as they have but that you will become much more financially flush than you are now and ear you money than your partner. While you may both be at a level that satisfies you now, relationships do get tricky when the balance shifts. While modern men are becoming increasingly comfortable having a high-earning female partner, they may have expected to be the lead earner. If this changes, it can be an issue with some men whose pride is hurt by not fulfilling the role of chief breadwinner. Finding out how important being the main provider is to someone could be important in predicting future problems.
7. I would very much prefer to be with someone who did not have major economic responsibilities to children or parents unless they had a lot of money and these responsibilities did not affect our life together.
Let's face it: The older people get, the more economic responsibilities they accumulate. By the time people are in the mid-to-late twenties they may already have educational or other kinds of debt. Our lives continue to get more and more fiscally complicated because the older we get, the more we find ourselves having to take care of other people besides ourselves-children, parents, spouses no longer able to work. Even by the age of thirty many people have taken on all sorts of obligations: child care, child support, medical issues, care of a sick family member, mortgages, among a large list of other possible economic drains.
it is hard to avoid monetary baggage - yours or someone else's. Even You are adamant about not inheriting someone else's money problems it often hard to get an accurate reading on someone's personal finances is people who have nothing to hide are often very private about their soy sonic status. it may be almost impossible to find out how encumbered someone might be. If you are very worried about being dragged down by someone else's debt or don't want to sacrifice your own standard of living because of a potential partner's financial obligations, you do have to pay special attention to their circumstances. You need to talk about money to find out if you share the same values, habits, and priorities. Questions such as how much you both think is right to spend on a child's education or when economic responsibility to children ends if ever could become crucial areas of disagreement. If you are seriously interested in getting into a long-term relationship, you need to discuss issues such as savings, charity, mixing funds, and a myriad of other financial matters. Money management is a day -in, day-out challenge, and unless you see money in similar terms you are going to have problems.