Core Values

What's Really Important to You

There are a few values that each of us hold dear. They may be our belief in God, or in the political process, or about environmental issues and our responsibility to the natural world or to other human beings. In any case, these are the values that we try and uphold in our daily lives. Often we use these values not only to judge whether or not we admire someone, but whether or not we even want to be friends with someone.

These values are obviously important in the deep, intimate relationship of marriage or long-term commitment. However, there are areas in which a couple might differ from each other, and they risk losing respect for each other if their ideas or opinions are dramatically divergent. For some feminists, for instance, it would be critical that their partner believe in equality for women in the workplace and in personal relationships; for someone else who was deeply religious and observant, a partner's beliefs and involvement in a joint life organized around religious community might be nonnegotiable. Everyone has their own closely held values and in a relationship, it is less important what these values are than whether or not they are shared or if a compromise on them is possible. Often, when people say they have found their soul mate, what they are really saying is that they have found someone with whom they are totally comfortable-and that comfort level often means that their most important values are in sync. The couple sees the world in the same way with the same judgments, and this makes them feel a deep kinship with one another.

The list of critical values could be quite particular to a given person, so the statements in the following quiz are not meant to be inclusive but rather to make you think about these and other values that are critically important to you. Therefore, this list is meant to be suggestive; use it to create your own list of values and which, if any, you would be willing to modify for the sake of a partner who disagreed with you on these core elements of your life.

Check each statement about which you feel strongly, either for or against. If you do not hold a particularly firm opinion one way or another, go on to the next statement.

1. I feel sharing religious traditions is extremely important in a relationship. I believe that the best-case scenario is a couple who has the same religion and same values about religious education.

2. I care about politics and want someone to either support the same party I do or support the general platform of that party.

3. Education is extremely important to me. I would sacrifice to educate my children, and I want someone to have a similar educational background and concerns to my own.

4. Health and fitness is very important to me. I care about my health and physical well-being and I want a partner who cares as much about their own well-being as I do mine.

5. I believe in giving to good causes or doing volunteer activities that make the world a better place. I want a partner who also shares my level of commitment to these values.

6. I care a lot about the right to individual freedoms and civil liberties. I would have trouble being with a partner who was strongly opposed to my views on abortion, homosexuality, military action, gun control, etc.

7. World peace and other global issues (such as the environment) are extremely important to me. I believe our planet is in grave danger.

Scoring

Whether or not you agree or disagree with these statements, give yourself one point if one or the other side of each statement would be important to you in a relationship.

0-2: You do not hold strong opinions on many core values; you could probably get along with someone who disagreed with you.

3-5: There are a significant number of these core values that you hold dear and it would be dangerous to get into a relationship in which you had widely divergent approaches from your partner. You would probably be very attracted, however, to someone who felt strongly and similarly about these areas.

6-7: You are a person of many passionately held values, probably not limited to the ones above. You will definitely need someone who has similar core values to your own-or terrific negotiating skills. Sometimes passionate people respect passionatly held differences of opinion. Still, this probably means a lot of conflict throughout the relationship that could endanger your sense of being soul mates, and ultimately undermine your love for one another.

Romantic Assessment

1. I feel sharing religious traditions is extremely important in a relationship. I believe that the best-case scenario is a couple who has the same religion and same values about religious education.

Most people come from some kind of religious tradition, which they may or may not have adopted as their own. If they are very observant, they often feel they need to be with someone from the same group or someone who at least supports common values and activities. This can also work in reverse: that is, some people have rejected certain religious traditions and this rejection is a very important part of who they are and how they want to live. This is especially true if they consider themselves escapees from a specific orthodoxy. It took a lot of effort and perhaps grief from their family, to separate from their background and they don't want to be seduced or dragged back into it.

For many people, religious background and religious beliefs are so important that they won't even consider being with anyone who doesn't share both, and so it may never be a problem. But it is not uncommon that people underestimate the importance of their religious background and it surfaces only when the relationship starts to get serious, or when a couple starts discussing the possibility of having and raising a child together. This can occur pretty far down the relationship road and reveal some unsettlingly strong feelings, which may be difficult to modify. Religion, it has been observed, has a strong emotional component, unreachable by simple rational discussion. It is wise to talk about it, and talk about it honestly, early on in the relationship.

2. I care about politics and want someone to either support the same party I do or support the general platform of that party.

Some people are very politically savvy and involved. They wouldn't miss the morning newspaper; in fact, they often read three or four papers to make sure they are up to date on all the political gossip and commentary. Other people find politics, and especially politicians, boring and depressing-and they really don't want to let the national or global picture enter their life any more than is absolutely unavoidable. Of course there are plenty of people in between, but it is the extremes of feeling and involvement we are interested in here. Politics may be irrelevant to many, but to those who care about who is in office, what are the current government policies, and what social and military legislation is affecting their lives, the issues raised by these subjects can be inflammatory.

James Carville and Mary Matalin are a couple who seem to be deeply committed to each other but who are also committed to diametrically opposed political parties and are political operatives at the highest level. As entertaining as they are when they disagree about politics on talk shows, one wonders how two people who have such strong beliefs in opposite directions are able to get along, much less have the intimacy and comfort of a happy marriage. Many people who care deeply about political issues can get so angry with people who do not share their political beliefs that they have trouble holding their tempers. They may even regard the other person contemptuously. All the hot-button issues: abortion, Supreme Court appointments, military policy, gay rights, civil liberties, etc., come up again and again. For most people, this is incitement to argument and frustration. Only the most rational and respectful of partners would be able to navigate comfortably through these controversies without getting mad at each other. Conflict isn't always avoidable in relationships and may not be such a bad thing if it is constructive and helps people to sort out their beliefs. But political loyalties are rarely plastic (polling suggests, in fact, that they are notoriously steadfast) and the values that each party represents may be so different that arguing about politics is really a challenge to one's most deeply held values.

3. Education is extremely important to me. I would sacrifice to educate my children, and I want someone to have a similar educational background and concerns to my own.

Most people believe in good education-but the degree of importance it holds in their lives varies greatly. The area of greatest disagreement happens when one person is in favor of spending a great deal of money to send their children to four years of college-and possibly beyond-while the other person thinks it's a waste of money, especially for a very expensive private school. Views about education often originate from a person's own experience, and if one person has a lot of postsecondary education and the other does not, the arguments about the importance of education often represent different backgrounds. Educational similarity might not sound important, but it does represent a kind of training. It's the respect for that training that literally affects the way partners look at things. People who have been to college, and enjoyed that experience, are taught to do critical thinking, that is, to think about how the material or findings they are presented with were derived and look for holes in the validity of information before accepting it. Non-college-educated people (or people who went to a high school that didn't encourage critical thinking) often find their collegeeducated spouse picky, critical, and tiresome; non-college-educated people often look to the values underlying a statement rather than the research -although of course that is not always the case.

The bottom line on this difference is that education is a surrogate for class background. Educated people may have learned how to argue better, use more sources to underscore their point, and feel that the weight of academic opinion is important in shaping their viewpoint-all positions that a less educated partner may not share-or respect. In general, people with a similar educational background are going to understand each other's worldview a bit better.

4. Health and fitness is very important to me. I care about my health and physical well-being and I want a partner who cares about their own well-being as much as I do mine.

Western countries in particular have become very healthand fitnessconscious-but that doesn't mean that every citizen exercises and watches what they eat. People who aren't fitness-conscious don't make it one of the ways they select a partner, but for people who are disciplined about exercise and try to eat healthy foods, a difference of opinion about how to live a healthy life can create serious problems. Health and fitness regimes really work a lot better if you have a partner who supports you. If your partner overeats, especially junk food, or doesn't practice any health regimes, it can sate conflicts about how the day should be organized or how fit each of u should be. If you are someone who is unconcerned about dieting or dislined exercise, you may resent the amount of time a partner spends on ese pursuits. If one person is a serious athlete, quite a bit of time will be spent exercising and perhaps preparing for games or competitions. How much time a couple spends together is an elemental part of a relationship, id if one person is athletic and the other is not, the amount of time exended on exercise could eat up most of the couple's discretionary time. If someone is very committed to their physical program, the two people need discuss how much time can be dedicated to sport or fitness. Only extreme differences create a problem, but this issue is not rare in relationships.

5. I believe in giving to good causes or doing volunteer activities that make the world a better place. I want a partner who also shares my level of commitment to these values.

Many people feel their existence on this earth is justified by the good works hey do while they are here. They admire others who are charitable and who give back to the world, and they feel best about themselves when they’re doing something that improves other people's lives, building affordable housing, lobbying for children's rights, or some larger cause than their own happiness. People like this have been part of the Peace Corps, Mercy Corps, or similar organizations. They may be very active in their church, be a board member of a group that has an educational or philanthropic purpose, or serve as occasional volunteers at hospitals or charitable organizations. Sometimes their passion to help others becomes the main and driving force of their lives and they want a partner who has the same calling as they do, or at least does not resent their own need to be of service. This can become an issue between couples who don't place the same weight on charitable giving or charitable acts when precious time or resources are involved. Most important, someone who sees giving as extremely important may lose respect for a partner who does little or nothing in this arena.

6. I care a lot about the right to individual freedoms and civil liberties. I would have trouble being with a partner who was strongly opposed to my views on abortion, homosexuality, military action, gun control, etc.

A couple needs to be in agreement when it comes to fundamental beliefs about social issues. When two people have strongly held views on opposite sides of a social policy platform, usually these differences are enough to stop courtship in its tracks.

But occasionally couples will agree on most but not all of these issues. They may, for example, agree on everything except whether to respect a picket line in a union dispute or to support gay marriage. And while people do not usually break up over their differences on social issues, heated disputes can make a couple feel less respect for one another than they otherwise would. Liberals who have a partner who is conservative on these issues might feel that their partner had a lack of compassion or humanity; conservatives could feel that their partner has lost their moral compass is unpatriotic or simply is being foolish by protecting one group's interests over the population in general. A strong difference here between partners is almost always alienating. Some of these issues may not arise in the early days of a relationship so it is important that you be aware of how a potential partner feels about these and other important social concerns before you find yourself at loggerheads.

7. World peace and other global issues (such as the environment) are extremely important to me. I believe our planet is in grave danger.

Many of us look at the newspaper or watch the television news and see the daily damage of war and environmental pollutants and other problems but don't become activists. However, there are a large number of people who take on the world as their project and work hard at being global-minded citizens. Usually they are concerned with subjects like population growth, world health, world peace, and preservation of the environment. If this activism is at the center of someone's value system, they are likely to be impatient with or disappointed in someone who either doesn't care, or who cares but doesn't do anything. If they are heavily involved in these kinds of concerns, it shapes the way they live their life. How it affects their relationship depends on how passionately invested they are, how tolerant they are of the differences between themselves and their partner, and how polar or modest their differences of opinion really are. However, even great differences in commitment and opinion are not necessarily toxic in a relationship. Some partners like to clash on issues. They like having different worldviews or supporting different political candidates and they spar with each other, hoping that over time they will change or modify their partner's stance. Still, the more common stance is to want a partner who shares your worldview. Many of these values form a person's deepest identity, that is, they are the values by which they judge themselves and what they do. If a partner does not understand how important these feelings and commitments are, and furthermore, cannot personally support them, their partner can feel emotionally isolated and unloved. If a person's deepest values are not respected, and in the best case shared, only the strongest of romantic connections will be unaffected.
